# 1.1. Runthrough of set theory

# Plan, kinda
1. Actually, all sections but starred ones look boring, aka I think I know them well. Well, let's skim them anyway.
1. ...author warns about this and does suggest to do exercises, wisely. Also author warns that typical student's competence runs out around half a chapter in. Well, let's see how ours will hold.

# Sections
1. Set exercises are mind-numbingly boring. Well, okay, the one that was about factoring a subset of R into a product was fun enough.
1. Function exercises likewise; the last is about good enough.
1. Okay, order types aren't bad. Dictionary order on product. Real line as dictionary order on Z * [0; 1). Much weirder [0; 1) * Z. Immediate predecessors/successors. Exercises are good! Last especially.
    1. Ex: least upper bound iff greatest lower bound
1. Integers and reals aren't bad but not very sparkly? But aren't bad.
1. Finsets are technically important but I'm tired and therefore brush them off as boring.
1. Countables and uncountables likewise. Did exercises tho, so we're fine.
1. Aha, recursion principle is just about well-founding of (strong) recursion. Exercises are not so trivial to be inaccessibly boring, but very easy.
1. Infinities and Choice: I think they're actually lying about Choice being equivalent to having an explicit choice function. 
    1. Aka as I understand it if you can build an explicit choice function w/o using Choice, your particular instance of choice is a _theorem of ZF_  with your function being the proof body.
    2. Also: suddenly, I see the connection between Choice and orders, somewhat? Because all exercises on "make an explicit choice function" I did by defining a well-ordering.
1. Maximum principle: apparently I am out of brain for today. 