# 1.2.8: Product topology

1. Box topology vs product topology
    1. We want product because it's more universal; there're, surprise surprise, some continuous functions you can't factor through box
    2. I think projections are in fact enough: you can already project from product (it has V × $\prod X$), but you can't factor this through box because box demands additional open sets — infinite intersections — that product doesn't have
3. J-shaped products in Set
    1. = A^J; = set of functions from J to A; sometimes tuple and sometimes functional notation
2. Theorem 19.1: that arbitrary products of opens is a basis for box, and finite products of opens is a basis for product
    1. ....this is kind of....definitional? Well, first part is the definition of box, and the second follows immediately from finitely intersecting preimages of projections.
2. Theorem 19.2: that producting bases arbitrarily gives a base for box topology, and finitely gives a base for product topology
    1. well, take a set that's a product of infinite or finite open sets. decompose every one of these into a strictcover by the basis. union over product of these. Done.
3. Theorem 19.3: if we have J-indexed collection of spaces and their subspaces, then producting over J gives a product space w/ a product subspace, wrt box and product both
    1. Aka: J-shaped product and subspace operations commute.
    2. Let's...state this more precisely
    3. Suppose we have a topology X and its subset A and a subset topology on A.
    4. we could product over X and then take product of As as a subset of that and induce a subset topology there. Or we could product subset topologies directly.
    5. It is stated that these are the same.
    6. Well, let's see. open sets of A are open sets of X intersected by A. any open set of $\Prod A$ is from the basis, elements of which are J-indexed products of open sets of A_j, which are some open sets X_j intersected by A_j.
    7. What happens if we product X first? well, all open sets of $\Prod X$ are from the basis of J-indexed products of open sets of X. if we intersect that by A, we intersect...elementwise, right. So any open set of $\Prod X$ is equal to a union of basis sets, which all get intersected from a product of open sets X_j to intersections $X_j \cap A_j$, open in A_j. which gives us a union of basis elements of $\Prod A$.
    8. On the one hand, this feels trivial, on the other, it feels _confusing_ and that's not the state one wants to be, damn it
4. Theorem 19.4: Producting Hausdorffs gives a Hausdorff in both box and product
    1. two points are just two sequences of points of X_j.
    2. take the first j in which sequences differ. take two disjoint open sets to be components of product open sets in that index; take all over components to be entire spaces.
    3. Dddddone.
5. Theorem 19.5: product of closures is closure of products, in box and product both
    1. Weird, actually.
    2. ok, so, reminders: 
        1. product topologies are either box-like or product-like (infinite or coinfinite products of open sets); 
        2. product of a J-indexed family of sets is, well, such a product. in contains any sequences whose points are in respective sets, componentwise.
        3. closure of a set in an intersection of all closed sets containing it. Or it is an addition of all limits. which are points all neighbourhoods of which intersect the set.
    3. & so now we want to prove that infinite products of closures are the same thing as a closure of an infinite product.
    4. Hmmmm.
    5. How does a limit point of a product look like?
    6. any its neighbourhood intersects it, which means in any index any component neighbourhood intersects that component of the set.
        4. which does cache out into "any neighbourhood in any component intersects the set" because both box and topology have the "whole in all components, except A in a given component" neighbourhood for every A
    7. which means that closure of the whole product is at least contained in the product of closures; every limit point of the product must also be a limit point componentwise
    8. Now the other way around: why a product of limit points must also be a limit point?
    9. well, if there was a neighbourhood of such a product point that did not intersect the set, then there would be a component in which they're disjoint, and in that component the component point wouldn't be a limit point, would it.
    10. So, done. Huh.
        4. ......no, wait, we didn't mention box-product difference anywhere.
        5. guess it wasn't in fact relevant?
6. Theorem 19.6: factoring f : A -> product into components, however, is only possible when we work w/ product topology, and not with box
    1. ...I forget if we did actually prove that product is factorable
        6. we know that the box isn't; attempts to factor product-projections through it will fail due to additional open-sets demands
    2. ok, two ways: if all components are continuous then so's the product, and vice versa
    3. reminder: "continuous" means "preimages of opens are open", or "preimages of closed are closed", or other things ~~this margin is~~ we don't care to list rn
    4. .....oh, I know how to prove whole to components easily; they're compositions of whole w/ continuous projections; cool
    5. now, if all components are continuous, then:
        7. let's pick some prebasis of $\prod X$, which is just an $A_i×\prod_{\neg i} X_j$.
        8. preimage of this is...equal to the intersection of componentwise preimages, which are the whole C for all components but i & f_i^{-1}(A_i) for i.
        9. that last thing is known to be open because f_i is continuous.
        10. ....done.

# Exercises
4. Canonical isomorphism between (X_1×...X_{n-1})×X_n and X_1×...×X_n.
    1. well, functions themselves are elementwise identities.
    7. Preimages of open sets are, well, identical sets. The question is whether open sets induced by these two products are identical.
    8. in the second basis is from n-ary products of open sets. in the first we take arbitrary unions of n-1-ary products, then product that w/ the nth open set, & this is a basis.
    9. well, all second-kind basis sets are evidently first-kind basis sets, because "arbitrary unions" can give us "exactly one such basis set"
    10. & any first-kind basis set is in fact a union of second-kind basis sets, & therefore open, because we can take a $\Cup X^{n-1} × X_n$ and push the product inside the union and get a $\Cup X^n$, and voila.
    11. ....I think this concludes the proof? any open set in one can be seen as an open in the other, ergo they're identical.
    12. Yeah, cool.
5. Theorem about product continuous maps being decomposable & mergeable holds _one_ way for box products; which way
    1. I'm guessing you can decompose still? because that's still just a composition w/ projections, & projections are....still continuous, right.
    14. but if you could merge, you'd be in product.
6. sequence of points in product converges iff it converges componentwise. 
    1. I forgot what exactly it means "sequence converges"; in gen-top (aka as defined above) it means "any neigh of limit point contains almost whole sequence"
    2. well, if any product-neigh contains almost whole sequence, then any component-neigh must also contain almost whole component-sequence, ...duh
    3. if any component-neigh contains almost whole, then: typical product-neighs are products of finite amount of component-neighs & whole sets elsewise; whole sets will obviously contain the whole sequence, & between finite component neighs there's still only a finite amount of points not contained in all of them
    2. what about box: well, then we can have infinite amount of component-neighs that do not contain longer & longer subsequences, & the open set made from producting them all would not in fact contain almost whole sequence; for any finite index of the sequence there'd be components in which more than that many points are not contained; ergo, amount of points of the sequence not contained in the whole product cannot be finite.
7. $\R^\omega$ is understandable; $\R^∞$ is the ~~sobset~~ subset of sequences which are eventually zero. What's the closure or $\R^∞$ in $\R^\omega$, in box & product?
    3. ....well, we know the theorem that closure _of a product_ in either box or product is the product of closures, right. this might be useful.
        1. Except $\R^∞$ is not presentable as a product! I don't think. So the theorem won't actually help.
    4. ok, so what-are limit points of R^∞. points every neigh of whom intersects R^∞ somewhere.
    5. Uh. how do we figure whether a point is a limit point of a set again?
        2. we can look over bases around that point & see if they all intersect the set; that'd be enough.
    6. ok, so bases around arbitrary point of $\R^\omega$ in box are arbitrary products of open sets around component points, bases in product are finite products of open sets etc.
    7. which of them do and do not intersect R^∞?
        3. in box, we do have some that do not intersect; if a point has infinite nonzero components, then we take a small neighbourhood in each such component & product them all, & then every point in that product-neigh has infinitely many nonzero components
        4. in product, we can have non-whole space in only finitely many components, & so ...literally any open neighbourhood of any point contains elements of R^∞
    8. so in product topology closure of R^∞ is in fact the whole $\R^\omega$! cool.
    9. & in box I think taking limits does not give us anything additional. Huh!
8. linear functions in R^\omega that...have a_i>0 are homeomorphisms.
    1. ≠0, maybe? tho w/e.
    2. ok, so first of all they're invertible: y = ax + b <-> x = y/a - b/a.
    3. second, they're known to be homeos componentwise, & for product this automatically gives us continuity either way, & therefore homeomorphity.
    4. third, what _about_ box?
    5. in box, additionally preimages of $\prod A_i$ need to be open
        5. ...and for the other direction, open preimages must imply open images
        6. (well, it's a bijection, so this can be simplified to "preimage is open iff image is")
    6. ...I have a vague feeling that componentwise homeomorphity implies that this thing projects open components to open components & back? & therefore everything's okay in box?
        7. mmm, if we try to state this explicitly, we get:
        8. let's consider arbitrary basis set of the box, built out of open sets in all components
        9. its preimage can be computed componentwise; it's $\prod f_i^{-1}(A_i)$
        10. f_i are all homeomorphisms, & so they produce open preimages
        11. given that we're in box, infinite product of open preimages is again open, so we're good
    7. yeah I don't see any problems here. should we maybe look @ answers somewhere?
        12. there was an answer book @ libgen I think
        13. it turns out the solution we've seen is written by someone else (it's a good solution-book tho), and ends @ exactly the current chapter
        14. also our reasoning is correct, even if they do a clever generalizable lemma to perform it.
9. Choice is equivalent to saying that arbitrary cartesian products of sets are nonempty.
    8. .......duh????
10. yo, action
    1. let's have a C (source), a product $\prod X^_\alpha$, and a bundle of functions from C to components.
    2. first, let's observe a unique coarsest topology on A that permits all these functions to be continuous
        1. well. let's take all preimages of open sets under these functions & declare that a ~~prebasis~~ subbasis. .....done: any topology on A relative to which all fs are continuous will in fact need to have these sets open, & this topology does in fact exist & therefore is unique coarsest.
    3. second, let's....observe that the way we built that topology in the previous point is the way to build this topology from a prebasis. subbasis. w/e.
    4. sidethought:
        2. ...this looks like it could be some kind of categorical construction?
        3. like, a subobject of the product wrt....some particular arrows? except that these arrows are not even from or to product. bleh.
        4. ...just to mention: this is _not_ a pullback. nor a pushforward.
    5. third, let's show that a map _to_ C (w/ the relevant topology) is continuous iff composing it w/ the bundle gives continuous functions
        5. ...well, if it's continuous then of course composing it w/ continuous fs preserves continuity
        6. the other way is much more fun
            1. Q: ....are you _sure_ this is not a pullback. This lemma here states that continuity from a bundle somehow factors into continuity of underlying components. something something unique factorizations etc.
            2. A: it's.. kind of hard to talk about this? because this unique coarsest topology arises from the data that is not yet inside the category? like, objects of the category are topologies; before we've defined a topology I don't yet know how to talk about functions we're trying to make into arrows? & I have no idea how to talk about arrows that are the same _function_ but different _arrows_ because they're between non-equivalent topologies.
            3. Q: Ah well. Hey, maybe this somehow will fall out of Top as a monad.
        7. ...anyway, let's observe that a function to a coarsest topology is continuous if all its extensions on the right are
        8. well, g is continuous if its preimages of open sets are open. it'd be enough to demonstrate this on a prebasis of C. a prebasis of C is: preimages of open sets under fs.
        9. so for any open set in this prebasis, we follow it forward into the open set A_i in X_i it's a preimage of, we take preimage of A_i under the composition, and would you look at that, it's open because composition is continuous.
        10. so, yeah. huh. this looks like a _useful_ lemma.
    6. fourth: let's build the product map f: C -> \prod X from fs. consider the subspace Z of \prod that's the image of C. observe that images of open sets under f are open there.
        1. Ugh.
            4. (...ok, I'll call C A, as the textbook does.)
        2. I'm tempted to say that this subspace should be equivalent to A?
        3. oooookay; this subspace contains as points exactly sequences of projections of points of A; one sequence per point. that's...an obvious bijection w/ A.
        4. Now, open sets of A are generated by preimages of open sets of Xs under fs. open sets of \prod X are finite products of open sets of Xs. open sets of Z are...finite products of open sets of Xs, intersected by the image of A in \prod, which...can't even be done componentwise, because if elements {1} and {2} of A project to (1_X, 1_Y) and (2_X, 2_Y) in sets (X, Y) respectfully, then Z is {(1_X, 1_Y), (2_X, 2_Y)} ≠ {1_X, 2_X} × {1_Y, 2_Y}
        5. ok, to reiterate: we get open sets of Z when we product finite amounts of open sets of Xs and then pick only points that are collectively projected from A.
        6. mmm. for example, we could do the following: we could pick an open set ...B of an X, preproject (preject?) it to A via that f, then project this forward w/ collective f to \prod / Z
            5. & on the other hand, we could take the open set B × \prod X of \prod X & pick only points of it that are projected from A.
            6. which would be points of A that in B's component fall into B, aka exactly preimage of B.
        7. ...& that's pretty much it.
11. ok, I think we're done here.