# 1.2.9: Metric topology

[toc]
# Second run
1. Concepts of metric, distance, epsilon-balls w/ centers
2. metric topology w/ a ball-basis
    1. lemma about balls being a basis
3. metrizable spaces
    2. mention of Urysohn's metrization & further metrizations
4. promise of metrization of R^n and R^\omega
5. ...dense action, todo later
6. Definition: 
    3. bounded subset: a subset pairwise distances in which have a finite supremum
    4. its diameter is that supremum (undefined if the subset is empty)
    5. boundedness is specific to metric but not to topology (not a topological property); metrics w/ different characteristics can induce the same topology
7. Theorem 20.1: we can take any metric d, bound it above via d' := (min 1) . d, & the induced topology will be the same
    6. ok, so.. all <1-radius balls are the same, & >1-radius balls in the bounded metric are the whole space, so this operation does not produce any new open sets.
    7. conversely, any >1-radius ball (as an open set) can be strictcovered by unioning sufficiently small balls over all points of >1-radius ball.
    8. ....right, it was necessary to check that this is a metric.
        1. well, triangle should hold? if in the triangle inequality the right side gets smaller, then that right side is guaranteed to be >= 1, & the lhs is in any case guaranteed to be =< 1, & we're cool.
        2. what are other conditions of the metric I forgot?
        3. positive-definition, 0 at itself, symmetry, right.
8. Definition of euclidean norm & metric
    1. they say that proof tat d is a metric takes nonzero effort, and, uh, why
    2. well, $d(x,y) = (\sum (x_i - y_i)^2) ^{1/2}$
$$
(\sum (x_i - y_i)^2)^{1/2} \overset{?} \le (\sum (x_i - z_i)^2)^{1/2} + (\sum (y_i - z_i)^2)^{1/2} \\
\sum (x_i - y_i)^2 \overset{?} \le \sum (x_i - z_i)^2 + \sum (y_i - z_i)^2 + 2 \sqrt {\sum (x_i - z_i)^2 \sum (y_i - z_i)^2} \\
x - y = x - z + z - y \\
(x-y)^2 = (x-z)^2 + (z-y)^2 + 2(x-z)(z-y)
$$
-   3. ok, so it'd be enough to show that $\sum (x_i-z_i)(z_i-y_i) \le \sqrt {\sum (x_i - z_i)^2 \sum (y_i - z_i)^2}$
$$
\sum (x_i-z_i)(z_i-y_i) \overset{?}\le \sqrt {\sum (x_i - z_i)^2 \sum (y_i - z_i)^2} \\
(\sum (x_i-z_i)(z_i-y_i))^2 \overset{?}\le \sum (x_i - z_i)^2 \sum (y_i - z_i)^2 \\
\sum_{i,j} (x_i-z_i)(z_i-y_i)(x_j-z_i)(z_j-y_j) \overset{?}\le \sum_{i,j} (x_i - z_i)^2 (y_j - z_j)^2 \\
\sum_{i,j} a_i a_j b_i b_j \overset{?}\le \sum_{i,j} a_i^2 b_j^2
$$
-   1. so, metaphorically, we have two columns of numbers; we either pick two rows & product all numbers in them & sum over pairs of rows, or we pick two rows, square the first column of first row & second column of second row, & sum over pairs of rows again.
    1. this...does not look fantastically obvious.
    1. (discontinuity)--ah, ok; if we look at the i×j table of terms on either side, their diagonals match, and i-jth and j-ith terms of two tables form a full square
    2. I mean,
$$
\sum_{i,j} a_i a_j b_i b_j \overset{?}\le \sum_{i,j} a_i^2 b_j^2 \\
\sum_{i=j} a_i^2 b_i^2 + \sum_{i<j} 2 a_i a_j b_i b_j \overset{?}\le \sum_{i=j} a_i^2 b_i^2 + \sum_{i<j} a_i^2 b_j^2 + a_j^2 b_i^2 \\
0 \le (a_i b_j - a_j b_i)^2
$$
-   1. and done. yay.
1. Definition: a square metric; its distance is the maximum absolute distance over dimensions. ...ah, it's square because its circles are squares and balls cubes.
    3. triangle inequality: $\max |x_i-y_i| \overset{?} \le \max |x_i-z_i| + \max |y_i - z_i|$
    4. first, let's fix the dimension on the left. we're guaranteed that values on the right are >= than their components in that direction, so $|x-y| \overset{?}\le |x-z| + |y-z|$
    5. I think I'll call this obviously true w/o carefully considering cases. like, either z is between x & y & then it's equality, or it's outside & then it's not; end of story.
1. Lemma 20.2: metric d' induces a nonstrictly finer topology than metric d iff any e-ball of d has a smaller e-ball of d' w/ the same center contained in it
    6. because then we can strictcover e-balls of d by e-balls of d', & that includes strictcovering its center, duh
    7. conversely, if d' does induce a nonstrictly finer topology, then.....its open sets that are e-balls of d are strictcovered by e-balls of d', & some of these contains the center of e-ball of d, & then there's a yet smaller d' ball around x contained in _that_ & we're done.
1. Theorem 20.3: euclidean & square topologies are in fact the same as product topology.
    8. mm, well, bases of these topologies are respectively balls, cubes, and rectangles; it's honestly _pretty obvious_ that you can cover any one by either of the other two
    9. ...ah, and if you want to do this formally you can do a little algebra & construct such balls explicitly & plug them into the previous lemma.
2. Extension of these metrics to R^\omega!
    1. well, infinite sum of squares need not converge; nor infinite supremum.
    2. on the other hand, one hand bind euclidean & square metrics above by 1, & get the same topology in finite cases, & _then_ the metric is defined everywhere.
        4. Q: ...this fixes "absolutely diverges" behaviour of infinite series; if these weren't sums of nonnegative elements we'd need to deal w/ nonabsolute convergence also
    3. ok, so for any J we define a bounded square metric to be sup(max(|x_i-y_i|, 1)); this gets us a topology; they're called uniform metric & uniform topology.
        1. how to these...cubes...look like.
        6. infinite-dimensional, w/ radii up to 1, & then a jump to the whole space? huh.
        7. we then can glue arbitrarily-sized cubes from infinite unions of these.
        8. I guess the point is that we want to know whether there're nontrivial balls containing both **0** and (0,1,2,...)
        9. & the answer is no; the only ball containing them both is the whole topology.
3. Theorem 20.4: about relation of uniform topology to box & product
    1. (I think I remember that it's between them, but let's at least try to investigate as if we don't know)
    2. reminder: product is coarser than box, product's basis rectangles can only be finite in finite number of dimensions, & box's can be finite in any dimensions
    3. Hmmmmmm.
    4. Naively it seems that uniform topology must be at least finer than box, because its cubes are by default finite in all dimensions, & can be glued into infinite in any dimension
    5. but, uh, ok, let's maybe try to ground this intuition more formally.
    6. (discontinuity)
    7. ok, so given that we know the answer, our sketch of the proof looks as follows:
    8. cubes are strictly finer than product's, uh, planes, & it's possible to glue planes from cubes
    9. rectangles contain all cubes, but Hilbert's Brick cannot contain cubes, & therefore rectangles are strictly finer
4. Q: uniform topology ain't a metrization of box or a product; is any of them in fact metrizable?
    1. A: spoiler: product, when J is countable, otherwise no.
    2. I dunno at the moment how I'd go proving impossibility, but let's leave this for later & for now concentrate on metrization of product.
5. Theorem 20.5: product on R^\omega is metrizable.
    1. ok, so we want a metric that produces "balls" that are infinite in all directions but finitely many, and no smaller ones.
    2. hmmmm. in the definition of ball we can work w/: dimensionwise distances & the radius.
    3. if we said "only distance in the first component matters", we'd get planes that are finite in the first component.
    4. if we said "distance is infimum over dimensions", we'd get....what?
    5. ok, so inside an r-ball around a point are all points that have at least 1 dimension differing from it on no more than r.
    6. which is....a union of those different on no more than r in the first, those etc in the second, etc
    7. these are, like, infinitely-dimensional crosses
        1. ...more accurately, when we generalize crosses to 3d, our kind unions thick planes around a point, not thck lines
    8. width of their lines can be glued arbitrarily
    7. this sounds like it's coarser than product, that's a good start
    8. & to get these crosses down to planes we take two crosses offset in all dimensions but 1 & intersect them
        2. ....this does not get us down to a single plane, not quite; in 3d this leaves us a plane w/ a couple rays through it, & in \omega we can't get these to zero w/ finite intersections
    ---
    1. (discontinuity)
    2. ok, so, review; we're trying to get ourselves balls that would cover finitely many dimensions finitely & all others infinitely
        1. when we tried "distance is infimum of differences over dimensions" we got as balls weird ∞-dimensionsal crosses made of infinite unions of "planes"
        4. which looks strictly coarser than what we needed; that's nice as a proof of concept but we want to go slightly finer
        5. ....also I'm not 100% sure that this is a metric, tho not particularly think it's not
    3. (summary)
    4. inf and sup can be thought of as /\ and \/ operators, and what we want is ??? (XORs are not in fact strict enough)
    5. if we try to sup over min over n-tuples, we can make any n-1 dimensions infinite, which is..probably finer than we want to get?
        6. if we then inf over n, Iiiii do not have a good idea what exactly happens
        7. I think it caches into "out of any infinite set, at least 1 dimension is finite but othes can be w/e"
        8. which I think implies cofinitely many infinite dimensions? if there were infinitely many infinite dimensions, that'd constitute an infinite set w/o a finite dimension
        9. which, again, probably too fine but I'm not completely sure because I don't understand balls here yet
        1. ...yeah, this here has points close in finitely many but far in cofinitely many components which have neighbourhoods not containing each other, & product I think does not allow that
    6. if we inf over max over n-tuples, we kind of say that there should be at least 1 collection of n finite dimensions, but otherwise w/e; this only finitely hacks @ crosses
        7. if we additionally sup over n, some kind of bullshit occurs; now the distance is < e if there're ∞ dimensions whose projections are < e, but this is not a metric anymore: d(repeat [0], repeat [0,1]) = 0, d(repeat [1], repeat [0,1]) = 0, d(repeat [0], repeat [1]) = 1
    7. inf sup or sup inf over cofinite sets are both too fine, allowing not-containing neighbourhoods for finitely close cofinitely distant points
    8. ok, that's enough for today
        8. & also I dunno if we're having fun or if this is a good research practice (research on the bleeding edge is honestly different & we don't really care for basics of general topology)
    ---
    1. Y reminds that inf is not a metric at all
    2. & also tells that topologies can be defined by a collection of seminorms (d=0 does not imply x=y), how tho
    ---
    1. so we were trying to extend a cube (or an ~~octahedron~~ cocube) to...infinity on some (cofinitely any, ideally) dimensions, but in such a way that it's still convex (triangle holds & the metric's a metric)
    2. well, we could ignore any single dimension, but then wouldn't be able to restrict on it. likewise for any set of dimensions.
    3. sooo we want to be able to restrict dimensions, just not infinitely many of them simultaneously.
    4. I think we don't particularly need to relax restrictions on any single dimension; we can always restrict on others & glue on it & get it unrestricted
    5. if we say that d_1<r and (d_1+d_2)<2r, this..doesn't really imply much about d_2, hm, only that it's <2r. Also, we can relax d_1<r to d_1<2r by unioning. that's good, I think.
    6. so, what do we get if we try sup avg n?
        1. .....I'm probably trying to fit too much in my head simultaneously? & getting cache misses & can't quite progress
        2. ok, maybe let's try so simplify/decompose this thing
        3. how does it look in R^2?
    7. (discontinuity)
    8. ok, in the end I gave up & looked up the metric, & _damn,_ I might have been literally one last attempt-step away from success
1. (reflection on attempts)
    1. did not notice that inf is not a ball; talking about this was useful & in that regard Y is in fact qualified
    2. went around w/ vague understanding of what I'm trying to do; trying to be more formal might have been useful? tho I still didn't actually write formal steps, & might not have been able before
    3. only later noticed that I can go around not getting ball-shapes? by direct checking? ...this might have been useful as a fallback in the hadnwaving of the structure of the proof
    4. .....went around thinking that I don't know _what I need to know/understand_ and therefore babbled undirectedly
        4. could instead try to handwave what kind of things it'd be useful to get understanding of
        5. or: to imagine a state of understanding in which I can in fact construct the proof out of available tools directly
    1. could try to handwave tools we have available....and what they, uh, give us, intuitively
        1. bounding the distance globally: removes the problem of distances between arbitrary points by setting it to MAX_BOUND
        2. bounding locally: we can make any direction bound, this is useful for....
        2. ...divide by n: by doing this, we can, uh, 
            1. in the unbound case, this kind of lets any finite-dimensional subplane grow as far as it wants?
        3. avg/sup: we can take sups over expressions; this requires them all to hold; this allows to set infinite borders on balls
    2. writing more _is definitely a good idea_
        4. if I don't know what to write, _reflecting on the process is also good idea_ and produces answers to "what do I even do from here"

1. (babbling on how I could have discovered the thing, but after I looked it up)
2. sum w/o division is a cocube; sum w/ division is....a lot of freedom, really; can do e.g. <r in all but measure-0 dims & go nuts in these
    2. if we try avg over bounded dims, then we _really_ can go nuts in any measure-0 dims & this contributes approximately nothing to the end avg
    3. but we still can't go nuts in measure-1 dims because this starts affecting the avg
    4. if we had a metric that could like avg ignore going nuts (aka setting 1s) in measure-1 dims we might be set
    5. avg can do this because individual dims are "smoothed out" by the division-by-n and limit; others' smallness overshadows them
    6. but addition still makes all individual nuts-directions contribute together; it might be nice if we could make them make their case individually & not contribute any more as the n grows
    7. lim of d_1/1 + d_2/2 + d_3/3 + etc does in fact make further contributions smaller, tho not small enough to be finite; we could weight them further, like by /n^2?
        4. how can one escape an epsilon-ball, here?
        5. growing d_1 to eps, ot d_2 to 4×eps, or d_3 to 9×eps, & then at some point you can't grow d enough because it's bounded by 1
        6. which gets us...balls escapable in any finite dimensions but no balls escapable in all dimensions. huh.
    8. ...can we maybe simplify this idea, of balls escapable in finite dimensions but not all dimensions
        7. it relies on the fact that the ball is finitely small & dimensions are increasingly weighted & at some point dimension can't overcome the weight to escape the ball
            2. (that this doesn't matter enough was a mistaken assumption, huh; this is in retrospect an obvious way the infinite case would be different from finitary intuitions)
            3. (so: I could try to write even this seemingly silly idea down & why it shouldn't help & maybe discover that it should actually)
            4. (also: writing down why things shouldn't work is helpful, keeps less in memory & lets reflect on when these assumptions are wrong etc)
        8. so, really, /\ over any weighted d_i would work
        9. so, sup d_n/n should work
        1. (& there we go)

# Exercises
1. ()
    1. First: L_1 in R_n induces the usual metric.
        2. I mean, duh.
    2. Second: L_p does too
        3. _duh_
2. R×R in dictionary is metrizable
    1. uh.
    4. How about: if points are vertically distant, the distance is as usual up to 1, and everything else is @ distance 1
    5. then epsilon-balls are vertical intervals, you can cover vertical lines with them, & you can union lines as necessary, and you get open rays & you're done.
3. Let's have a metric space with metric d. 
    1. d : X×X -> \R is itself continuous.
        1. reminder: "continuous" is "preimage of open is open" or likewise for closed; enough to show this on any basis/prebasis
            1. standard basis of \R is intervals; preimage of (-∞, a) is all pairs of points less than a-distand, of (a, +∞) more than a-distant
        2. open sets of X×X are made from the basis of pairs of open balls
        3. so: we want to cover "all pairs of points with distance <a" with "pairs of balls"
        4. I think we do this by imposing their distance to be <a-eps & then making eps/3 balls around & then any pair of points in these balls is <a-distant
        5. likewise for >a we get them to be >a+eps & make eps/3 balls & then any pair of points in those balls is >a
    1. moreover, d induces the coarsest topology under which it is continuous
        1. _huh_
        2. so this means that continuity of a metric function d is enough to have all pairs of balls open
        3. well, what does its continuity imply?
        4. that any set of <a-distant pairs is open, and likewise for >a-distant
            2. that's....kind of a lot? like, we don't have any open set that'd exclude the diagonal-no wait we do, >a exclude the diagonal
            3. but we....can't quite restrict those sets to particular pairs of points? only to classes of pairs w/ the same distance?
            4. mm, we can do "all pairs <a", "all pairs >a", "all pairs a<x<b", and I really have no idea how to restrict this to particular pairs
        5. can we strictcover a pair of d1-, d2-balls with that?
        6. well, let's pick a pair of points in those balls and try to cover this pair by a mandatorily open set nonstrictly inside these balls
        7. this pair has a distance, we need to include this distance & at least an epsilon neighbourhood of distances around that
        8. &....I don't see how we could not include many pairs of points outside these two balls?
        9. ...ok, it'd be enough to do a ball×X and X×ball, but I dunno if this helps
        10. we're trying to pick a preimage that'd cover a single point on the first dimension & maybe some points nearby but not many other points in the first dimension, & ???
        11. if there were distances that points outside of the ball could not occupy at all, that'd work, but this looks very impossible
        12. ah well, let's shelve it for the moment
    2. Sidethought: .....there's something here about \R being something prototypical & metrics being the way to "pull back" the standard topology of R to any X×X in the coarsest way; can X×X be generalized here? can R and its standard topology?