# 1.2.11: Quotient topology (2023 rerun)

1. ok so!
1. first of all, there's the concept of a quotient map.
    1. a map p : X → Y is quotient if it's ~~cont~~, surj, and V ⊂ Y is open _if_ and only if p⁻¹ V is open.
        1. (continuity is "only if" part)
    1. equivalent, easier conceptualization: p is quotient if it's cont, surj, and, for any open p-saturated U ⊂ X, p U is open
        1. p-saturated means it's a preimage of its image; not extended by taking image and then preimage. p⁻¹(p U) = U.
    1. equivalents: if image of closed saturated is closed; if V is closed iff its preimage is closed.
1. recall that open map maps opens to opens, and closed map maps closed to closed.
    1. obv. both open & closed (surj) maps are quot.
    1. Example: gluing I + I → I on a point is quot but not open, because the first copy is open but its image is not.
    1. Example: π₁ : ℝ² → ℝ is quot but not closed, because the graph of y = 1/x is closed but its image ℝ–{0} is not.

1. quot maps can induce quot topology on the target!
    1. I mean, given a surj map p : X → Y we can uniquely define a topology on Y that makes p quot.
    1. we basically declare images of all open p-saturated sets open and that's it.
        1. that's also the finest topology wrt which p is cont.
    1. it's obvious p is quot then (by criterion); that this constitutes a topology is easy:
        1. Y is open by surj; if p(C_i) are open as images of open saturated, then their union is image of union, & therefore an image of open saturated also.
        1. likewise for intersections.
1. Construction: we can always take an equivalence relation on X, map X → X/~ surjectively, and induce the quot topology by that.
    1. Example: if we contract a disk's boundary into a point, we get a 2-sphere.
    1. Example: if we glue sides of a square w/o inversions, we get a T.

1. Observation: restricting a quot map to subspace topology does not preserve quot!
1. However:
    1. if subspace A is p-saturated and (A is open or p is open) then p : A → p A is quot.
        1. (given p : X → Y is quot.)
    1. to get that, we'll want the criterion: if C ⊂ A is p-sat. open in A, then it should be open in p A.
    1. if A is p-sat open in X, then C is also p-sat open in X:
        1. C is open in A, so it's U ∩ A for an open U, & so it's open in X as intersect of 2 opens
        1. C is p-sat in A, so, by def, p⁻¹(p C) ∩ A = C. that's an intersection of two p-sats, which is p-sat: it's an intersection of preimages of p, which is a preimage of p of intersection.
    1. then, if A is p-sat open in X and C p-sat open in A, then C is p-sat open in X, p C is open in Y by quot, and p C ∩ p A is open in p A by definition of subspace topology.
    1. now, if A is not open but p is, C = U ∩ A with U open in X. p C = p U ∩ p A; p U is open because p is open, & then p C is open in p A by definition of subspace.
    1. QED.
1. Side: same shit works if A is closed or p is closed.

1. compositions of quots are quots!
    1. surj by the same property in Set; cont by Top; only need image of saturated open to be open. let p⁻¹ (q⁻¹ W) be open. that's p-saturated & its image q⁻¹ W is open in Y. that's q-saturated and W is open in Z. QED.
1. products of quot-maps are not generally quot.
    1. local compactness is smh enough to fix that
    1. also, product of open maps is open, & therefore quot.
1. quot does not preserve Hausdorffity!
    1. apparently it's a good question what one needs to make the quotient space Haus.

1. interesting factoring theorems:
    1. Given a quot p : X → Y and a g : Y → Z that....does not disagree w/ p, we have:
        1. g is factorable into p ; f
        1. f is cont iff g is cont
        1. f is quot iff g is quot
        1. Note: "does not disagree" means that if p collapses some distinction, g does so too; i.e. g is constant on any p⁻¹ {y}.
    1. g is factorable: trivial; g maps any p⁻1 {y} uniformly, let f y := g (p⁻¹ {y}).
    1. if f is cont or quot then g obviously is by composition.
    1. if g is cont, we want [W open → f⁻¹ W open]. given W open, g⁻¹ W = p⁻¹ (f⁻¹ W) is p-sat, & therefore its image f⁻¹ W is open, as desired.
    1. if g is quot, we want [f⁻¹ W open → W open]. given f⁻¹ W open, its preimage p⁻¹ (f⁻¹ W) = g⁻¹ W is open and g-sat; therefore, the image W is open, as desired.

1. Consequence:
    1. let's have a surj cont g : X → Z. we can factor it into 2 maps: non-injective quotient p : X → X* first, and "roughing" bijective cont f : X* → Z second.
    1. how so: g⁻¹ {z} defines an equivalence relation on X, and there we go. by above, f exists and is cont.
    1. moreover! f is homeo iff g is quot.
        1. if f is homeo it's quot & then g is quot by composition.
        1. if g is quot then f is bijective quot, and....therefore its inversion is also cont, because V open <-> f⁻¹ V open by quot.
    1. moreover!! if Z is Haus, then so is X*.
        1. I forgot what's Haus, remind me. aha, any 2 points have disjoint (open) neighbourhoods.
        1. ...I mean, yeah, you take 2 points in X*, map them to Z by f, take their disjoint open neighs, preimage them back to X*, they're open? what's the problem?
        1. ...ah, that requires f to be injective. well, it is! case closed.
1. curious example:
    1. consider X = ℕ copies of I, Z = subspace of ℝ² of line segments (x, y=x/n) on x ∈ [0, 1].
    1. There's an obvious map X → Z : map (x, n) ↦ (x, x/n). it is claimed to not be homeo!
    1. so, obviously we can split it into X → X* → Z. again, X* → Z is bijective cont, but not homeo. so, topology on Z is strictly rougher; there's some open subset in X* whose image is not open in Z.
    1. given their example w/ limit points ((1/n, 1/n²) has a limit in (0, 0) in Z, but in X it has no limit points & is closed.), I kind of want to observe an open subset that....ignores order of compression?
    1. it's, hm. would it be enough to find a basis element that's not a basis element? ...probably not, because choice of basis is not very canonical.
    1. nonetheless, it's probably....true that open sets around 0 can cut arbitrary parts of individual lines in X*, but in Z there's a point where you can't get smaller? ......that sounds weird: we _can_ define a countable union of between-lines segments in Z that cut segments at arbitrary points...
    1. ......yes but it won't be open? because it needs _some_ basis element covering 0, and that puts a bound on how "close you can get" to 0; 
1. example of non-quot product:
    1. quotient p : ℝ → X* by ℤ. also, identity i : ℚ → ℚ. claim: p × i : ℝ × ℚ → X* × ℚ is not quot.
    1. %%()%%

1. Exercises!
    1. `details of Example 3`: it's about mapping ℝ to "x < 0", "x = 0", "x > 0", we did that, it's easy
    2. 
    3. let's restrict ℝ² to x ≥ 0 OR y=0. (hammer-shaped.). now project it by π₁, collapsing y.
        1. this is quot, but not open or closed.
        1. quot easily? check that images of open sat are open. saturated are....unions of vertical lines. to be open, intuitively, it needs to be a wall on the right, an open interval (or a ray) on the left, or an open handle in the middle; maybe union of these. makes sense? makes sense. then images of these are ofc unions of open intervals.
        1. not closed: need a closed set whose image isn't. how about we steal from a previous example & take a graph of 1/x, except deformed a bit to have a hole at x=1, and to align with y=0 on the left. then its image has a single-point hole & is not closed.
        1. not open: ....I think we can't achieve that on the right, & so we'll need to fuck with the left side or the boundary?
            1. it...might be notable that any line segment & any point is closed.
            1. ....wait but. uh. I _think_ we also can't fuck with the left side much? aside from handle-shaped open sets, open sets purely on the left are normal ℝ-shaped open sets; they're also not the way. so maybe the handle is the key.
            1. ..._oh_. a rectangle _above_ the origin w/ the left boundary is open, and its image is semiopen. phew.
    4. a: let's quotient ℝ² by x + y² = C. that's homeo to a familiar space; which one?
        1. I.....assume it's ℝ? we can send ℝ² to ℝ by g x y = x + y²; it's surjective, it's uniform on equiv-sets, therefore it factors through the factor map. ....moreover, it is _exactly_ a factorization via g⁻¹ {z}, so the map X* → Z is bij, and so we only need g to be quot to show that f is homeo.
        1. is g quot? it..merely needs to map g-saturated opens to opens. to get a union of x+y²=C parabolas to be open, it needs to be an....open stacking of parabolas? like, if C is sat open & contains (x,y) then by sat it contains the whole x+y²=C, and also a small neighbourhood, and therefore all the parabolas intersecting the small neighbourhood, and therefore it....contains a parabola-union-shaped path-connected open neigh of (x,y). is that enough to conclude the shape of sat opens of g?
        1. ...how about this: any g-sat open C is _a union_ of parabola-union-shaped path-connected open neighs, union being done over all points of C. that's itself a parabola-union-shaped etc, so we're done? I think.
    4. b: same, but for x² + y² = C.
        1. I mean, same, but g x y = x² + y² is surjective onto [0, ∞), not ℝ. then....basically same?
    5. let p : X → Y be open. if A is open in X, then p : A → p A is also open.
        1. I mean uh. any U open in A is also open in X, therefore p U is open in Y (by p open), therefore p U ∩ p A is open in p A by subset. QED.
    6. (an ℝ_K exercise which I don't like.)