# 1.2.4 — 1.2.5. Product topology; Subspace topology

[toc]

# Product topology
1. Yaaay!
2. Theorem: product of bases is a basis.
    1. Because: present any set in multiples as union of sets from bases; multiply these unions; take union elementwise; voila.

2. Oooooh, projections!
    1. Eeee! Theorem about projection-preimages of open sets of multiplicands being a subbasis for the product topology!

# Subspace topology
1. Yay~
2. Lemma 16.1: restricting a basis by a subset begets a basis of subspace topology.
3. Lemma 16.2: if Z is open in Y is open in X, then X is open in X.
    1. Hm. Well, there must be some W open in X that begets Z when intersected w/ Y?
    2. And then if we just intersect W and Y in X, we get Z open in X.

# Subspaces versus orders and products
1. I'm guessing that products of subspaces is a subspace of products
    1. And probably not vice versa?
    2. Okay, how'd I go about proving this.
    3. I think proving that a subbase I'd get from a product of subspaces and a subbase I'd get from a subspace of a product is the same.
    4. Okay, let's have:
        1. sets X and Y, topologies $\mathcal T$ and $\mathcal U$ on them,
        2. subsets X' and Y' and subspace topologies $\mathcal T'$ and $\mathcal U'$, 
        3. and a product X×Y w/ product topology $\mathcal {T×U}$, 
        4. and a product topology $\mathcal {T' × U'}$, and a subspace topology $\mathcal {(T×U)'}$.
    5. Now, let's characterize a basis of $\mathcal {T' × U'}$.
        1. It is: pairs of sets A', B' such that: 
            $A \in \mathcal T, A' = A \cap X', B \in \mathcal U, B' = B \cap Y'$
    2. Then, how do we even characterize $\mathcal {(T×U)'}$?
        1. Its points are still pairs of elements, except that only xs and ys present in X' and Y' are allowed.
        2. And a basis for $\mathcal {(T×U)'}$ is a basis for $\mathcal {T×U}$ except w/ all sets in this basis intersected w/ X'×Y'.
        3. Which means: we take a pair A×B that were open in X and Y, and we intersect it by X'×Y', and we get I think exactly $(A \cap X')×(B \cap Y')$ which is what we wanted exaactly.
2. And that subspace of the order-induced-topology is not the order-induced-topology on the subspace.
    1. I remember there being some examples on \R.
    2. Like, if we're restricting R to $\{-1\} \cup (0, 1)$ then:
        1. if it inherits subsppace topology from the standard, it inherits {-1} as a singleton from ({)-1.5, -0.5)
        2. But if we build an order-induced topology from restricted order, then {-1} is not present.
3. Okay, their examples are: 
    1. Restriction of \R to [a, b], on which order and subspace actually agree
    2. Restriction not unlike the one I remmembered above, in which they don't
    3. And a restriction of dictionary-ordered R² to a square I²
        1. In which upper half of the square is open in the subspace (because individual vertical intervals are open, and subspace cuts them into semiintervals nicely )
        2. But not in the dictionary, because they're not maximal elements and are not allowed to have their own closed intervals.
3. They say that this does not happen if we, er, only allow restrictions to intervals or rays, or perhaps to a more general class of _convex sets_.
    1. Okay, first, definition: a subset of an oset is convex iff for any a < b in it it contains (a,b) wholly. Sounds okay.
    2. Then, a theorem: a subspace topology on a convex subset agrees w/ the order topology induced by the order in that convex subset. Hm.
    3. Okay, let's pick arbitrary points a, b in the convex set. 
    4. They're gonna make an (a, b) open set in the order-induced topology, both in the original oset and in the suboset. And, given convexity, they're all preserved by subspace topology restriction.
    5. Suppose the subset does not have minimum and maximum. Then I think there are no other open sets in the basis of either topology, and we're done.
    6. Suppose the subset does have a maximum. Then...
        1. If it's also a maximum of the original, we're probably all set.
        2. If it's not: we pick another element above it, and subspace cuts _this_ original open interval into a proper open semiinterval induced by the subset order.
    3. I need to redo this more cleanly.

# Lemma 16.1
1. restricting a basis by a subset begets a basis of subspace topology.

1. Reminder: basis is a collection of open sets from which a topology can be reconstructed by unioning
    1. as a prerequisite/consequence, it can strictcover any finite intersection of itself, and contains empty and full subsets
2. So, we need to prove that a) intersecting a basis produces basis-property, b) any open set of the subspace topology is in fact a union of basis intersections
3. b) seems trivial: if $X = \bigcup B_\alpha$ then $X \cap Y$ = $\bigcup B_\alpha \cap Y$
4. intersecting a basis obviously produces the empty and th whole subset of the subspace topology
5. ...and then the main point of a) works by the same logic as b).

# Theorem 16.4
1. Let X be an ordered set in the order topology; let Y be a subset of X that is convex in X. Then the order topology on Y is the same as the topology Y inherits as a subspace of X.
    1. Reminder: Y is convex in X iff X is ordered and for any a,b Y contains it also contains (a, b) entirely.
    2. Okay, so we can show that topologies are equivalent by showing that any open set one contains, other contains also. 
    3. Or: by describing a basis for either and showing that they strictcover each other.
    4. Okay, so we have two topologies on Y: 
        1. one has as basis (a, b) from Y, and optionally [a, b) from Y if Y has a minimum (or (a, b] for a maximum)
            1. Note that these (a, b) are exactly the same as these in X, because convex, except that a and b are drawn only from Y
        2. other has as basis (a, b) from X, intersected by Y. and also optionally [a, b) etc.
    3. Cover first by the second:
        1. (a, b) from Y is trivially strictcovered by (a, b) from X intersected by Y, because in this case Y contains a and b and (a, b) in X is equal to (a, b) in Y. This deals w/ (a, b), and we need to do [a, b) and likewise.
        1. Suppose Y has a minimum a. 
        1. If it agrees w/ the minimum of X, [a, b) is strictcovered trivially as above.
        2. if not, we pick some element c < a in X and intersect (c, b) by Y.
        3. It will contain a itself because (c, b) and Y both do, it won't contain anything less than a because Y doesn't, and it will contain (a, b) entirely because Y is convex, and so it will be equal to [a, b).
        4. That's one direction done.
    5. Now the other direction.
        1. Let's pick an (a, b) in X and intersect it w/ Y. 
        1. There are four possibilities: a and b are in Y, only one is in, both are outside.
            1. if both are inside, then Y contains (a, b) by convexity.
            2. if both are outside, then the intersection is Y and Y does contain itself.
            3. if one is in and one is out, then let's for simplicity assume that a is in and b is out, and: 
            4. either Y has a maximum c between them and then we're golden: Y contains c by assumption and (a, c) by convexity and so it has (a, c], 
            5. or it doesn't, and then we can cover any point c of (a, b) that's still in Y by picking a point d > c in Y and going (a, d) over it. Done.
        3. Now let's pick an [a, b) in X. 
            1. if both are outside of Y, ditto.
            2. if both are inside, then... a is in fact the left boundary and ditto.
            3. if a is outside and b inside then see argument above.
            4. if a is inside and b outside then intersection is again the whole Y.
        5. Done.

# Exercises
1. if $A \subset Y \subset X$ then subspace topology of A is the same whether it's inherited from X directly or through Y.
    1. Subspace topology of A in Y takes open sets of Y and intersects them w/ A and calls these open sets.
    2. Subspace topology of A in X takes open sets of X and intersects them w/ A and calls these open sets.
    3. And, like, given that $A \subset Y$, $A \cap X_\alpha = A \cap (Y \cap X_\alpha)$ pretty directly, right.
---
2. Suppose T' is trictly finer than T on X. What about their subspace restrictions to Y?
    1. U' can still be strictly finer than U if we, like, just remove one point w/o disturbing the space much.
    2. U' can be equal to U if we, er, remove sections of the space that are uneqally finely mapped by them. Worst case we restrict them both to $\varnothing$ and voila.
    3. U' can't be coarser than U because any open set U has via restriction has an open set in T, and therefore in T', and therefore in U'.
---
3. Let Y = [-1, 1] inherit the standard R topology via subspace. Which of these 5 sets are open in it, and in R?
    1. {1/2 < |x| < 1}
        1. = (-1, -1/2) \cup (1/2, 1): open in both
    2. {1/2 < |x| <= 1}
        1. [-1, -1/2) \cup (1/2, 1]: open in Y but not R
        2. Oh, is any internal interval of Y closed? And therefore clopen? Pretty cool, that.
        3. I kind of suspect that there's some connection to computability here, but I dunno what kind of connection.
    3. {1/2 <= |x| < 1}
        1. = (-1, -1/2] \cup [1/2, 1): nope in either. Nopen.
    4. {1/2 <= |x| <= 1}
        1. [-1, -1/2] \cup [1/2, 1]: nopen in either
    5. {0 < |x| < 1} \ {1/n | n \in \Z_+}.
        1. = (-1, 1) \ {±1/n | n \in \Z_+}.
        2. Iiiiii think this must contain 0 still, which is not strictcoverable by any open interval in either.
        3. So nopen in either.
---
4. f is open if image of every open set is open.
    1. Show that projections are open.
    2. Lemma: enough to show that they're open on a prebasis. or a basis.
        1. Why: if f(A_i) are open, then so is $\bigcup f(A_i) = f(\bigcup A_i)$ 
        2. and $f(A \cap B) \subset f(A) \cap f(B)$, so, uh, okay, prebasis might not be enough, abort.
    2. And the basis of X×Y is just {A×B | A and B are open}, whose projections are precisely open sets, so.
---
5. let's have the same set X, X' in topologies $\mathcal{T \subset T'}$ and the same set Y, Y' in $\mathcal{U \subset U'}$. 
    1. Product of subspace topologies X' × Y' is finer than X × Y.
        1. Reminder: "finer" means "contains all open subsets of"
        2. ...I mean, yes, obviously? we take all open sets of X and Y, and possibly more, and product them, and the product has at least all of these?
    3. Consider the reverse implication: X' × Y' is finer than X × Y; can T' and U' be not-finer than T and U?
        1. I think it should be trivial to have T' and U' identical to T and U on X and Y, but incomparable otherwise.
---
6. Rational rectangles are a basis for R².
    1. I mean, obviously.
    2. Aka: rationals are dense in R, and so for any real rectangle and its real interior point we can find rationals between that point and every boundary of the rectangle, and cover that point with the appropriate rational rectangle.
---
7. X is ordered, Y is its convex proper subset. Is Y a ray or an interval?
    1. Okay, recall: interval is {x | a < x < b}, optionally including a and b; ray is {x | a < x} or the other way around, with a also being optionally included.
    2. okay, Y has, metaphorically, two sides, and certain constructions work like "if both, or one, or neither side is like this, then"
    3. One construction is: if both sides are either extremal or include all there is in X in that direction, then Y is either a closed interval or a ray.
    4. If _either_ side is extremal, then either Y includes everything in the other direction and is a ray, or it doesn't, and then, uh, if X has a LUB and a GLB then Y is an interval based on that
    5. But what if X doesn't do that? Such as if it's $\mathbb Q$?
        1. (It turns out, here, than convexity is also always relative to _something_)
    2. I believe I can do a convex subset $\{ x \mid \sqrt 2 < x < \sqrt 3 \}$ of rationals which is not an interval _relative to raionals_ because its endpoints aren't.
    3. But I think this whole thing works if X does have LUB and GLBs.
---
8. Let's have a line L in R². What topology does it inherit from R_l×R? From R_l×R_l?
    1. ...okay, in the first case the basis is: rectangles w/ left side but not angles included
    2. I think this amounts to inherited R_l for any L that's not vertical and to R if it is
    3. In the second case the basis is rectangles w/ left and bottom side included
    4. Which bequeaths discrete topology on all non-horizontal and non-vertical lines, and lower (or upper) limit topology on these (depending on the direction of the line)
---
9. Dictionary on R² = R_d(iscrete)×R.
    1. Okay, basis in the first is: take two points, take the open ray above the left and the open ray below the right one, add the whole plane between the two and we're good
        1. vertical open intervals work
        2. vertical rays also work, huh: by unioning vertical open intrevals
    2. basis in the second: {x}×(a, b), vertical open intervals.
    3. trivial to strictcover second w/ the first
    4. not hard to see how to strictcover the first w/ the second: cover any vertical line, cover either ray and voila
    ---
    2. Also: comparison w/ standard
    3. Well, it has {x}×(a, b) which standard doesn't have
    4. and, (a, b) being obviously open in R_d, it has (a, b)×(c,d), which is all there is in the standard
    5. And so it's strictly finer than standard
---
10. Let's have I². Let's compare: product topology, dictionary on itself, subspace inherited from dictionary on R².
    1. in product basis is: open rectangles, with edges optionally included if they're on the edge.
        1. includes vertically closed rectangles, which self-dictionary does not have
    2. in dictionary: pick two points, go upward from the left one until you get to the right one.
        1. Includes vertical open intervals, which product does not have
        2. Probably does not include vertical semiopen intervals because we can't choose the "next" real point on the bottom
    3. in inherited dictionary: pick two points _not necessarily in the square_, do likewise.
        1. Includes vertical open intervals, which product does not have
        2. Includes vertical semiopen and _closed_ intervals which dictionary does not have
        3. obviously has everything dictionary has
        4. likewise for product, because any rectangle can be made out of arbitrary open or semiopen on boundary or closed on boundary vertical intervals.
---
11. Phew!