# 1.2.6: Closed sets and limits

[toc]
# Closed sets
1. Definition: A set is closed if it complements an open one.
    1. I also know that limits should work in such a way that a set is closed iff it contains all limits from itself.
2. Examples:
    1. Two closed rays in R are open.
        1. One is also.
        3. Closed interval is also.
        4. semiopen interval isn't.
    5. Closed quarterplane in R² is closed.
    6. In finite complement, finite sets are closed.
    7. In discrete, everything is closed. clopen, in fact.
    8. in $[0,1] \cup (2, 3)$ w/ subspace, [0,1] and (2, 3) are both open, and so are complementarily closed.
9. Well, yeah, intersections and finite unions of closed sets are closed
    1. And I'm guessing (remembering, mostly) that defining closed sets up to these requirements constitutes a topology. Yeah.
2. Theorem about when closed sets are closed in a subspace.
    1. Says they're closed iff they're an intersection of the subspace Y w/ a set closed in X.
    2. Hm. One way: if U is closed in X, then its complement is open, then its intersection w/ Y is open in Y, then complement of _that_ in Y is closed and is exactly the intersection of Y w/ U.
    3. Other way: if U' is closed in Y, Y–U' is open, then it has an overarching, mm, X–U that's open. And that intersects Y on exactly U'. Then complement of _that_ is open, and intersection of that complement w/ Y is exactly Y–U', as desired. Cool.
4. Theorem: if A is closed in Y is closed in X, then A is closed in X.
    1. Trivial: X–A is a finite union of X–Y and Y–A

# Interior and closure
1. Definitions!
    1. interior of A is the union of all open sets in A.
    2. closure of A is intersection of all closed sets containing A.
    3. ...pretty obviously Int A = A if A is open and A = Cl A if A is closed.
    4. Closures are respeective to subspaces (aka different depending on the overarching space)
    5. By default they closure to the "largest" mentioned space
6. Theorem: closure of A in $Y \subset X$ is intersection of closure of A in X by Y.
    1. Proof: Closure of A in Y is intersection of all closed sets in Y containing A. They are all intersections of Y w/ closed sets in X containing A, and any closed set in X containing A, intersected w/ Y, begets a closed set in Y containing A. Now, $\bigcap_\alpha (A_\alpha \cap Y) = (\bigcap_\alpha A_\alpha) \cap Y$. Done.

## Closures via neighbourhoods or basis
1. Note that it's possible to define intersection using a basis instead of a whole topology (which is usually less wieldy).
    1. Ah, closure is an intersection of _closed_ sets. That's a bit of a problem.
2. Which is given by Theorem 17.5:
    1. a) x is in Cl A iff every open neighbourhood of x intersects A.
    2. b) x is in Cl A iff every _basis_ neighbourhood of x intersects A.
3. Proof:
    1. Well, x is in Cl A iff its in every closed set containing A.
    1. Equivalently: if it's _absent_ from every open set _disjoint_ from A.
    2. aka: if every open set containing it does in fact intersect A.
    3. Well that was anticlimatic.
    3. As for basis: if all open neibourhoods of x intersect A then so do all basis neghbourhoods, and if all basis neighbourhoods of x intersect A then any open neighbourhood of x, being a union of basis, also must do so.

## Computations of closures
1. Okay, now let's have some practice computing closures w/ that theorem.
1. In standard R:
    1. Closure of (a, b)
        1. Basis is: open intervals.
        2. every basis neighbourhood of a and b does in fact intersect that, so a and b are in the closure.
        3. any additional points are intervally removed, and so can have a basis neighbourhood smol enough to not intersect (a, b).
        4. So it's [a, b]. Cool.
    5. Closure of {1/n | n \in Z_+}
        1. Uh.
        2. Any e≠0 is intervally removed from closest 1/ns.
        3. But they're, er, dense to the right of 0, aka any interval containing 0 contains them also, and so 0 is in the closure.
        4. Huh. Cool.
    5. Closure of {0} \cup (1, 2).
        1. 1 and 2 included, anything else not. Right? Yep.
    2. Closure of Q: ...R.
    2. Closure of Z_+: well, they're just points. So nothing additional.
    2. R_+ → R_+ \cup {0}.
3. (0, 1/2) in the subspace (0, 1] of R.
    1. well, 0 is absent from the space itself this time, so it doesn't get included.
    2. 1/2 does tho.
    3. ...oh right we could compute the closure in R and then simply intersect it w/ the subspace, I'll need to remember that.

# Limits
1. Limit points!!!
    1. Aka: cluster points, accummulation points
2. Definition: x is a limit of subset A if every open punctured neighbourhood of x intersects A.
    1. Equivalently: if it's in the closure of A - {x}.
    2. ...yeah, I see the equivalence: if open punctured neighbourhood intersects A, then it also does A - {x}, and then unpunctured also intersects that. And conversely.
3. Examples of computing limit points in R:
    1. (a, b) has as limit points the whole [a, b]
    2. {1/n | n \in Z_+} has exactly 0 as the only limit
    3. {0} \cup (1, 2) has [1, 2]
    4. Q has, well, R.
    5. Z_+ has nothing.
    6. R_+ has R_+ \cup {0}, of course.
7. Theorem: Cl A = A \cup Lim A.
    1. First, left included in right
        1. Suppose x is in Cl A but not A.
        2. Then A = A - {x} and x is in Cl (A - {x}).
        3. Done.
    2. Second, right included in left
        1. A is trivially in Cl A, let's do the other case.
        2. ...well, if x is not in A but in Lim A, then it's in Cl(A - {x}) = Cl A.
    3. Yeeeeah.
4. Corollary: set is closed iff it has all its limits.
    1. If $\text{Lim } A \subset A$ then $\text{Cl } A = A \cup \text{Lim } A = A$ and A is closed.
    2. If A is closed, then, we, er, work that equation the other way around.

# Hausdorff Spaces
1. !!!
2. Definition of convergence:
    1. In every (open?) neighbourhood of a potential "limit", only finitely many points of the sequence are not in it.
3. Hausdorff spaces have two desirable properties: every singleton is closed, and all sequences converge to a single point if at all.

4. Definition: a space is called Hausdorff if any two (distinct) points have disjoint open neighbourhoods.
5. Theorem: Hausdorf spaces do have all singletons closed
    1. Proof:
    2. Let's try showing that the closure of any singleton is not itself.
    3. Conversely, suppose that some singleton {x} has something else (y) in the closure.
    4. let's build a pair of disjoint open neighbourhoods for these two points.
    5. by theorem 17.5 every neighbourhood of y must intersect {x} to be in Cl {x}, except that by construction it doesn't. A contradiction.
    6. Ergo, Cl {x} can't contain anything else, and {x} is closed.
    7. Cool.

8. Note that only requiring that finite sets are all closed is weaker that Hausdorffity, and called T_1 axiom.
9. Theorem 17.9
    1. Let's have a topspace w/ axiom T_1: any finite subset is closed
    2. Then, theorem: x is a limit of A iff every neighbourhood of x infinitely intersects A
    3. Suppose there's one that intersects A finitely.
    4. That intersection is closed; its complement is open; these can be _removed_ from the neighourhood
    5. So then we have a punctured neighbourhood of x that is disjoint from A, and that contradicts x being a limit of A
    6. Conversely, if every neighbourhood of x infinitely intersects A, then so does every punctured neighbourhood, so there.

10. Theorem that in Hausdorff spaces sequence do in fact converge to at most a single point.
    1. Well, suppose there are two points to which a sequence converges.
    2. Then any two neighbourhoods of these two each have cofinitely many points from the sequence.
    3. Ergo, their intersection contains cofinitely many points of the sequence, ergo it is nonempty.
    4. But Hausdorffity requires at least some such pair to be disjoint. A contradiction.

5. Theorem: 
    1. simply ordered sets w/ order are Hausdorff
        1. reminder: order topology is generated by open rays as basis, Hausdorffity is disjoint neighbourhoods for any two points.
        2. well, uh, yes? let's have a < b; 
            1. if there's a a < c < b then (-∞, c) and (c, +∞) work
            2. if there's no such c then (-∞, b) and (a, +∞) work
    2. products of Hausdorffs are Hausdorff
        1. reminder: points of product are pairs (tuples), opens of product are products of finitely many opens (& cofinitely many whole spaces for infinite)
        2. so let's say we have two points $(x_1, y_1)$ and $(x_2, y_2)$, and $X_1 \sqcup X_2$ and $Y_1 \sqcup Y_2$ their disjoint neighbourhoods
        3. then $X_1 × Y_1 \sqcup X_2 × Y_2$, right
    3. subspaces of Hausdorff are Hausdorff
        1. well, two points of the subspace had disjoint pair before; if we intersect them w/ subspace they don't get any less disjoint

6. Note that quite some reverse mathematics was done in topology, and topspace axioms are the result.
    1. T_1 and Hausdorff are separation axioms; there are also countability axioms, compactness and connectedness conditions.

## Hausdorff from properties
1. Curiosity: are convergence and T_1 enough to guarantee Hausdorff?
2. Reminders: Hausdorff is when any two points have disjoint neighbourhoods; T_1 is when any finite set is closed; convergence is when any sequence has at most 1 limit (at most 1 point any neighbourhood of which contains almost the whole sequence)
3. Let's assume that finites are closed and sequences converge to at most single points and that there's a pair which does not have disjoint neighbourhoods and arrive at a contradiction
4. {x} and {y} and {x, y} are closed; therefore, X-{x} and X-{y} are open
5. ...consider sequence {x, x, x, ...}
6. x is obviously its limit
7. now, y cannot be its limit, so some neighbourhoods of y must not contain x. ...okay, that's not quite enough, X-{x} does not in fact contain x.
8. I bet lack of disjointness forces some additional limit on that sequence
9. or maybe on some other sequence
10. suppose we take arbitrary element z, look at the sequence {z,z,z,...} and consider x and y as candidates for its limit
11. neither can be its limit (because z already is), so both must have some neighbourhood disjoint from z
12. ....that's also not enough; we can have infinitely many zs and infinite intersection of corresponding neighoburhoods need not be open
13. so let's have the following topspace: finite complement on a_n
    1. a_i and a_j do not have disjoint neighbourhoods (because they're all cofinite); 
    2. all finite sets are closed; 
    3. any sequence is either unbounded and then does not have a limit,
    4. or bounded and unstable and does not have a limit 
        1. (a_i and a_j that both occur infinitely often can contain infinite but not cofinite subsequences in arbitrary neighbourhoods), 
        2. or bounded and stable and has unique limit.

# [1.2.5 exercises](../../../../!Personal%20projects/Math/Topology/Topology%20reading/1.2.6%20exercises.md)