# 1.2.6 exercises

[toc]
# 1
0. Let $\mathcal C$ a collections of subsets satisfy closed set axioms (finite unions, arbitrary intersections, $\varnothing$ and X). Show that their complements form a topology.
1. Okay, $\varnothing$ and X are complements to each other.
2. X – A $\cap$ X – B = X – $A \cup B$, so binary intersections are complements of binary unions
3. arbitrary union contains all that's in at least one, and does not contain things that are in none, which are: things that are in all complemented sets, which is: arbitrary intersection of them.

# 2
0. Let A be closed in Y and Y closed in X; then A is closed in X.
1. closed-in means: complement is open.
2. Then, uh, obviously? Well, almost.
3. Y – A is open in Y; this means that there's some Z open in X that union'd w/ Y is Y – A
4. We union Z w/ X – Y which is open in X, and we acquire an open X – A, done.

# 3
0. If A is closed in X and B in Y then A×B in X×Y
1. Okay, time to remember product topology
2. points are tuples (or sequences); basis open sets are tuples in which finitely many are open and others are the whole space
3. Or, for binary product, this begets us just pairs of open sets as the basis
4. Okay, so $(x,y) \in A×B)$ iff $x \in A \wedge y \in B$, so $(x, y) \not \in A×B$ iff $x \not \in A \vee y \not \in B$, aka complement of A×B is $(X–A)×Y \cup X×(Y–B)$
5. And both of these are open.
6. As a matter of fact, this extends naturally to arbitrary products, I think?

# 4
0. Let U be open in X and A closed in X. Then U – A is open in X, and A – U closed in X.
1. First is trivial and we used it already: X – A is open, and U – A is its intersection w/ U.
2. Second: X – U is closed, and its intersection w/ A is A – X and is closed.

# 5
0. Let X be a total order w/ order topology. Then $\overline{(a, b)} \subset [a, b]$. When is it equal?
1. Okay, so bar is closure. which means: intersection of all closed, or equivalently every point whose every neighbourhood intersects.
2. (a, b) are intervals {a < x < b}, [a, b] are {a <= x <= b}.
3. So we need to prove that no point >b and <a can be present in the closure of (a, b).
4. well, if b < c then (b, +∞) contains c and is disjoint from (a, b). Conversely for c < a.
5. Equality might not hold if [b, ?) is open, and is a neighbourhood of b which is disjoint from (a, b). This happens iff b has a predecessor. Conversely iff a has a successor.
6. Or, more plainly, $\overline{(a, b)} = [a, b]$ iff a does not have a successor nor b a predecessor.

# 6
0. Let A, B, $A_\alpha$ be arbitrary subsets of X. Then:
1. if $A \subset B$ then $\bar A \subset \bar B$
    1. Well, imagine that some point has all its neighbourhoods intersecting A but some of them disjoint from B.
    2. This is rather egregiously bullshit.
2. $\overline{A \cup B} = \bar A \cup \bar B$
    1. Well, you see, if every neighbourhood of a point intersects a binary union, then every neighbourhood intersects at least one of that union, and vice versa
    3. uh, wait, let's phrase these two again
    4. first is: closure of union; the set of points such that every their nneighbourhood intersects the union
    5. The second is the set of points such that every their neighbourhood intersects A, _union_ set of points every neighbourhood of which intersects B
    6. Can't there be points such that one of their neighbourhoods intersects only A and the other only B, so that they're in the closure of union but not union of closures?
    7. ....oooooh
    8. If there's such a point then we take two of its neighbourhoods that intersect only A and only B respectively, and intersect them
    9. And that one is not allowed to intersect nerither A nor B
    10. So every point in the closure of unions cannot have a nonintersecting neighbourhood for every one of finite union'd sets
3. $\overline{\bigcup A_\alpha} \supset \bigcup \bar A_\alpha$; requires a counterexample of equality
    1. Hmmmmm.
    2. Okay, so if at some point every neighbourhood intersects at least one of $A_\alpha$ then indeed every neighbourhood intersects their whole union
    3. But, uh, can every neighbourhood intersect the whole union and yet some neighbourhood not intersect any of the collection?
    4. (from the insight above): aha, so we make it so that for every set in the collection there's exactly one neighbourhood of the point that does not intersect it
    5. then every finite intersection of these will still intersect the infinite union
    6. So our example is: $\N_0$ as the space, $A_{i \in 1..} = \{i\}$, open spaces are $\N_0 – \{i\} \mid i \in 1...$

# 7
0. Criticism of the incorrect proof of $\overline{\bigcup A_\alpha} \subset \bigcup \bar A_\alpha$
1. I, uh, struggle w/ it somewhat
2. Ah, there it is
3. "Every neighbourhood U intersects some $A_\alpha$" jumps inappropriately to "x belongs to the closure of $A_\alpha$", because every U should intersect _specific_ $A_\alpha$ for x to be in its closure
4. it just so happens that a separate argument guarantees existence of such specific $A_\alpha$ for finite unions

# 8
0. Let A, B, $A_\alpha$ be subsets again. Then we're to check if:
1. $\overline{A\cap B} = \bar A \cap \bar B$
    1. I think it's $\subset$
    2. If every neighbourhood of x intersects the intersection of A and B, then every neighbourhood of x intersects A and it intersects B
    3. However, if every neighbourhood of x intersects both A and B, it's not required to intersect their intersection
    4. consider points: xyzw; A = xy, B = yz, open set is xzw. xzw intersects both A and B but not their nonempty intersection y.
2. $\overline{\bigcap A_\alpha} = \bigcap \bar A_\alpha$
    1. Same
3. $\overline{A–B} = \bar A – \bar B$
    1. $\supset$ I suspect because in the second we're substracting more and not replenishing it
    2. Like, A = [a, b] and B = {a, b} would do the trick
    3. Now to show at least that
    4. Aka can the latter have something that's not in the former
    5. So suppose we have x whose neighbourhoods each intersect A, some are disjoint from B, and some are disjoint from A – B
    6. Intersecting one of the second and third types, we get a neighbourhood disjoint from A; a contradiction

# 9−11: things are Hausdorff
9. Order topologies are Hausdorff
    1. Okay, remind me what's Hausdorffity
    2. Ah, right, every two points a < b have a pair of disjoint neighbourhoods
    3. if there's a c between them then (-∞, c) and (c, +∞) will do the trick
    4. if not then (-∞, b) = (-∞, a] and (a, +∞) = [b, +∞) work
10. product of Hausdorff is Hausdorff
    1. okay, so let's have two points (x_1, y_1) and (x_2, y_2) in the product.
    2. Let's find X_1 and X_2 disjoint neighbourhoods of x_1 and x_2 and Y_1 and Y2 likewise.
    3. I'm pretty sure that X_1×Y_1 must be disjoint from X_2×Y_2, as desired.
11. subspace of Hausdorff is Hausdorff
    1. Well, if two points in the subspace have neighbourhoods disjoint in the superspace, then intersecting those two a) will make them neighbourhoods wrt the subspace, and won't make them any less disjoint.

# 13: Hausdorff and diagonal
0. X is Hausdorff iff the diagonal $\Delta = \{(x, x) \mid x \in X\}$ is closed in X×X.
1. Okay, so X is Hausdorff iff any two points have disjoint neighbourhoods
    1. and as a conseuqence, all finite subsets are closed and all sequences have at most a single limit
2. Also maybe of note is the fact that arbitrary intersections and finite unions of closed are closed
3. Ok, so, direct: from hausdorf to closed diagonal
    1. Let's go over all pairs of points in X and consider their disjoint neighbourhood pair.
    6. let's product this pair. it will definitely contain (x,y), but no (z,z) because they're disjoint.
    5. Then we union all these products over $x, y \in X$.
    6. This produces an open set in X×X which contains all unequal pairs. Its complement, the diagonal, is closed. Done.
7. Converse:
    1. Let's look at the co-diagonal. It's an open set in X×X that contains (x,y) but no (z,z).
    4. it is a union of basis sets, and basis contains exactly pairs of open sets of X.
    5. among these, there must be a basis set that contains (x,y) but no (z,z).
    6. deconstructing it into open sets of X, we get a disjoint neighbourhoods for x & y.

# 14
0. limit of $\{{1 \over n} \mid n \in \Z_+\}$ in finite complement on $\R$
1. reminder: limit of a sequence is any point whose any open neighbourhood contains cofinite subsequence thereof
2. and finite complement topology on R is that where exactly finite subsets are closed
3. every open neighbourhood of any point in Z contains, er, everything but a finite amount of points
4. and therefore the entirety of _any_ sequence but finitely many points of it
5. So, in finite complement, any point is a limit of any sequence
6. Splendid

# 15
0. T_1 axiom is equivalent to any two points having a neighbourhood each not containing the other
1. Reminder: T_1 axiom is: all finite sets are closed
2. from T_1: we take closed singletons {x} and {y}, we take their complements. first is a neighbourhood of y not containing x; conversely.
3. Suppose now that any two points have such neighbourhoods; let's prove that singletons are closed.
4. Let's fix x, iterate over y, take neighbourhoods of y not containing x, union them all.
5. This thing contains the whole X except for x and is open. Ergo, {x} is closed.

# 16: a closure, hausdorff, T_1 in five topologies on R
0. Five topologies on R:
    1. standard, 
    2. (a, b) and also (a, b) – $\{{1 \over n}\}$, 
    3. finite complement, 
    4. upper limit ((a, b] is a basis), 
    5. (-∞, a) is a basis
1. Compute closure of $\{{1 \over n}\}$ in them
    0. Reminder: x is in Cl A iff any its basis neighbourhood intersects A
        1. Also: Cl A = A $\cup$ Lim A
    1. in R the only addition is the only limit 0
    2. in the second K is itself closed as a complement of R–K, and so closure does not add anything
        1. Note that 0 was the only possible addition, because it was a limit in the coarser standard topology, but might cease to be in finer, 
        2. and going to finer topologies only can restrict the closure w/ new closed sets to intersect over
    3. Well, the whole R is the limit of everything, so R is the closure.
    4. Also finer than standard, so 0 might or might not be present
        1. it's not: K $\cup${0} is closed, and so is (0, +∞) the complement of (-∞, 0], so K is closed.
    5. any basis neighbourhood of 0 and above intersects K around 0. some basis neighbourhoods below 0 don't.
        1. So closure is [0, +∞).
2. Which are Hausdorff
    1. Standard is: (-∞, a) and (b, +∞) are disjoint
    2. Second is finer than standard and so inherits disjoint pairs from it
    3. finite complement isn't; it has multiple limits as per Exercise 14 above
    4. upper limit is also finer than standard, and so also is Hausdorff
    5. no: fairly sure there're no disjoint neighbourhoods of a < b: any one containing b is of form (-∞, c>b), and so contains a
3. Which are T_1
    1. Standard is, inheriting from hausdorff
    2. second likewise
    3. yes, by definition
    4. upper limit likewise inherits from hausdorff
    5. also no: closed are of form [a, +∞)

# 17: closures in (rational) lower limit
0. lower limit topology ([a, b)) and [a, b) for rationals; closures of $(0, \sqrt 2)$ and $(\sqrt 2, 3)$ in them
1. $(0, \sqrt 2)$ gets 0 as a limit, and then $[0, \sqrt 2)$ is semi-directly closed in lower limit
    1. or alternatively, $[\sqrt 2, +∞)$ is an open neighbourhood of $\sqrt 2$ disjoint from $(0, \sqrt 2)$
2. in rational lower limit $\sqrt 2$ is also a limit; its lower limits can't start from $\sqrt 2$
3. lower limit for $(\sqrt 2, 3)$ is also $[\sqrt 2, 3)$ for same reasons
4. rational lower limit for it is also $[\sqrt 2, 3)$, because 3 _does_ have an open neighbourhood $[3, +∞)$ disjoint from

# 18: Closures of things in the ordered square
0. Reminder: square is ordered in dictionary, aka x_1 = x_2 ? x_1 <? x_2 : y_1 <? y_2
    1. basis of this is: vertical open rays
    1. Also: this is an order, and therefore Hausdorff
1. $\{(1/n, 0)\}$
    1. sequence, so has at most 1 new point
    2. I think it's (0, 1); any its neighbourhood needs to have some $(\epsilon, 0)$ above and so will contain the sequence
2. $\{ 1-1/n, 1/2 \}$
    1. Also a sequence, but limiting to the right
    2. ...(1, 0) probably is its limit?
    3. like, its neighbourhoods need to go to $(1-\epsilon, 1)$ and so will contain $(1-\epsilon/2, 1/2)$
3. $\{(0, 1), 0 \}$
    1. Bottom row w/o corners
    2. any vertically middle point will have tiny disjoint vertical neighbourhood
    3. bottom left corner likewise, top right corner likewise
    4. whole top row but its right end has neighbourhoods stretching upwards through the bottom
    5. bottom right point has them stretching backwards through whole lines backwards, and so also through the bottom
    6. So Cl $\{(0, 1), 0 \}$ is $\{(0, 1], 0 \} \cup \{[0, 1), 1 \}$
4. $\{(0, 1), 1/2 \}$
    1. middle row
    2. well, same shit as above
    3. vertically middle points have tiny vertical neighbourhoods, minimal and maximal points likewise, top and bottom rows except for these two need to overreach
5. $\{1/2, (0,1) \}$
    1. middle column
    2. vertically middle points do not intersect
    3. top and bottom points outside of the middle line also
    4. top and bottom points of the middle line can't escape it
    5. so $\{1/2, [0, 1] \}$

# 19: boundaries and their properties
0. boundary points lie in closures of both set an its complement
2. First: closure is a disjoint union of boundary and interior
    1. well, can an open set inside A intersect the closure of the complement of A?
    2. closure of complement is intersection of all closed sets containing the complement
    3. or it's a complement of union of (complements of closed sets containing X–A)
    4. which are open sets disjoint from X–A, aka contained in A
    5. so, yeah, boundary is exactly Cl A $\cap$ Co Int A
    6. and if you add Int A back to it, you get add back all that intersection removed, but no more than Cl A, so, yeah
3. Second: empty boundary <-> clopen set
    1. so, closure and co-interior are disjoint
    2. which happens when there's no gap between them, when they're equal
    3. & then they're both equal to A, and then A is clopen
    4. conversely
4. Boundary is closure minus set iff set is open
    1. so, the gap between closure and interior is the same as between closure and the set
    2. aka A = Int A, criterion of open sets
5. do all open sets coincide w/ interior of their closures?
    1. I think closures can contain bigger open sets than their progenitors
    2. Consider 2-point topology. the open point is not closed; its closure is both points, which is open.

# 20: Bd and Int of subsets of $\R^2$
1. Vertical line {x, 0}
    1. interior is empty; it's closed, so boundary is itself
2. two right quarter-planes w/o the horizontal between them, {x, y | x > 0, y ≠ 0}
    1. Int is itself, it's open
    2. Cl adds the horizontal between and the vertical to the left
    3. So Bd is, er, $\vdash$-shaped
3. union of these two
    1. ...well, Int does not change, nor does Cl, so Bd is again $\vdash$, right?
4. all rational vertical lines, {x, y | $x \in \mathbb Q$}
    1. I think Int is again empty
    2. But now Cl adds ...everything?
    3. So Bd is $\R^2$, yo
5. $x^2 - y^2 \le 1$
    1. uh
    3. $(x+y)(x-y) = 1$
    4. a hyperbola w/ diagonal axes? and it goes through right and left quarters.
    5. $\le$ means everything in the middle between these two curves.
    6. I think it's closed and Int is defined by same shit but $<$, so the boundary would be the hyperbola itself.
6. {x ≠ 0, y < 1/x}
    1. fucker
    2. okay, to the right of the 0 vertical it's a 1/x and everything strictly below it
    3. to the left it's again 1/x, and again everything strictly below it
    4. That's a fucking view
    5. ok, so strictness begets openness, here, so Int is itself
    6. And boundary is, er, x = 1/y and the whole vertical line
    7. what fun

# 21: Kuratowski
$$\gdef\ra\rightarrow$$
1. Starting from a set A, and applying operations Cl and Co, one can acquire no more than 14 distinct sets.
2. Also, build a subset of $\R$ that does in fact produce 14 distinct sets this way.
    1. Let's start w/ simple constructions, why don't we.
    2. $(a,b)$ (1) -> $[a, b]$ (2 = Cl 1), $(-∞, a] \cup [b, +∞)$ (3 = Co 1), $(-∞, a) \cup (b, +∞)$ (4 = Co 2). That it.
    3. ...you know, we need to draw here.

## Avenues of attack:
1. Cl and Co form a very restricted monoid, w/ a² = e and b² = b
2. we know how to build 10 distinct sets
    1. things often loop under cl co cl co, w/ loop of 4
    2. we can do 3 unique pre-steps, doubled by co
    3. {1/n} does 3; ()-{} also but differently (goes to loop)

### Cl Int inclusions
1. Lemma that Co Cl = Int Co and conversely
2. then monoid looks like A, Int A, Cl A, Cl Int A, Int Cl A, Int Cl Int A, Cl Int Cl A, and presumably nothing more (well, and Co versions thereof)
3. Establishing inclusions:
    1. obviously $\mathop{\text{Int}} X \subset X \subset \mathop{\text{Cl}} X$
    2. $X \subset Y \rightarrow \mathop{\text{Cl}} X \subset \mathop{\text{Cl}} Y$ because any closed set covering Y also covers X, and for X we can only intersect more of them, not less
    3. $X \subset Y \rightarrow \mathop{\text{Int}} X \subset \mathop{\text{Int}} Y$ because any open set inside X is definitely inside Y and so will make it into Int Y
4. $I \subset IC \subset CIC \subset C$: first by applying I to both, second by applying C to left, third because $IC \subset C$ by I to the right and then C to both
5. $I \subset ICI \subset CI \subset C$ w/ symmetrical reasoning
6. from $CI \subset C$, $ICI \subset IC$, likewise from $I \subset IC$, $CI \subset CIC$
7. CIC is suspected incomparable w/ A: $E \subset CIC \ra C \subset CIC \ra C = CIC$; 
    1. $CIC \subset E$...does not have obvious contradictions actually
1. So we have $I \subset ICI \subset IC, CI \subset CIC \subset C$ and also A between I and C
2. Our explicit constructions stop short (CIC = CI, ICI=IC), and we dunno yet how to prove that it dries up on three layers

## 7-point model
1. In which we fuck w/ a topology directly to build an A which has all 7 monoid elements distinct
2. We construct a 7-point topology characterized by:
    1. Points: $a, \underline a, \overline a, b, \underline b, c, d$
    2. ~Basis (mixed, ~basis in open acquired by inverting): open sets $a, a \underline a, b \underline b, cd, d$, closed sets $a \underline a \overline a, a \underline a \overline a b \underline b, a \underline a \overline a b \underline bc$
    3. Finally, $A := abc$
3. Why all these are necessary:
    0. (below, "X open in Y" usually means "there's an open Z such that $X \subset Z \subset Y$")
    1. a symbolizes Int A; needs to be distinct from b and c and open; b and c can't be in Int A
    2. $\overline a$ is an addition of Cl Int A (I /= CI) that's absent from Int Cl Int A (so ICI /= CI); can't be open in Cl Int A
    3. $\underline a$ is an addition that's present (so ICI /= I); should be open in Cl Int A
    3. $\underline b$ is the addition of Cl A (E /= C) that's present in Int Cl A (IC /= I); b and it should be open in Cl A; can't be open because then it's not in Cl A
    4. b is the non-addition of Cl that'd present in Int Cl A; allows $\underline b$ to not be open itself; should be open in Cl A
    4. c is the non-addition that's absent (IC /= E)
    5. d allows c to not be open in A
1. Model of this topology in $\R$:
    1. a = $(-1, 0) \cup ({1 \over n+1}, {1 \over n})$, $\underline a = \{{1 \over n} \mid n > 1 \} \cup \{0\}$, $\overline a = \{-1, 1\}$
        1. add a constant to these-all so that they do not intersect w/ b-group
    2. b = $(0,1) - \mathbb Q$, $\underline b = (0, 1) \cap \mathbb Q$, c = {0, 1, 2}, d is implicit (c is in fact not open in A)
    3. Now, observe:
    4. Int A = a; Cl Int A = [-1, 1], Int Cl Int A = (-1, 1)
    5. Cl A = [-1, 1] of a + [0,1] of b + {2} of c; Int Cl A = (-1, 1) + (0,1), Cl Int Cl A = [-1, 1] + [0, 1]; all done
    6. To acquire other seven, we make a copy of these three, but, uh, inverted, and then inversion gets us 7 new monoid elements
        1. Aka we add some infinite ray and make appropriately-shaped holes in it
    2. Phew
3. Now to prove that Cl Int Cl Int cannot go further
    1. ...later