# 1.2.11: Quotient topology

1. ok, first let's try to go at it directly, why don't we
1. we have examples of quotients; I quotioned by its ends becomes S^1; disk quotioned by the boundary becomes S^2, etc.
1. but: what happens to open sets in this process?
1. on an example of I: it sure looks like open sets around the glued point are unions of arbitrary pairs of open sets around glued points

1. more generally: 
    1. subsets happen when we delete something from a set
    1. this produces the inclusion function, and we get subset topology by _only_ requiring it to be continuous
    1. we get open exactly and only open sets intersected by the subset
1. conversely, quotients happen when we remove some distinctions
    1. this produces the onto-function, & we get quotient topology likewise, but this time we add all open sets we can because symmetry
    1. & so, we can't touch neighbourhoods disjoint from glued points; they project back into themselves & so we can't any new open set like that (it won't be in the original)
    1. but glued points' neighbourhoods project into neighbourhoods around their constituents, & so we can have an open set per any collection of open neighbourhoods of constituents

---

1. definition of quotient maps is surprising, what on the earth for do they need U open _iff_ its preimage is open?
    1. ah, they need it to formalize "we want as many open subsets as possible"
    1. I think

---

1. ok, once more with feeling or something

1. definition: quotient map X -> Y
    1. its surjective, and U of Y is open _iff_ p^-1(U) is open
1. Alternative:
    1. C of X is **saturated** wrt p if, for every y : Y, if C intersects p^-1({y}), it contains it entirely.
    1. ....aka, if going from C to Y via p, and then back again through p^-1 leaves us in C.
    1. then p is quotient if it's continuous and maps saturated open sets to open sets. hum.
    1. I kind of see.
1. open and closed quotient maps.
    1. surjective continuous maps that are either open or closed are automatically quotient.
    1. well, duh.

1. Thesis: a given surjective map, if demanded to be quotient, determines topology of its destination uniquely from the topology of the source.
    1. Ok, so, we look at a subset U of Y and its preimage, which is saturated.
    1. if preimage is open, then U must be, if it's not, U must not be. So this determines openness of any subset of Y.
    1. Check topology: 
        1. empty is empty, all is (by surjective) all
        1. intersection: preimage of intersection is intersection of preimages, yep
        1. union: I think same shit?
1. & yep this meshes well with "all possible open sets but no more"

1. saturated subspace thorem:
    1. if subspace is open or closed, then restriction is quotient
    1. if p is open or closed, then restriction is quotient
    1. 