# 1.2.1 — 1.2.2: Spaces, Bases

[ToC]

## Definitions
1. Definition: that much I know
1. Ex: show that cofinite subsets plus empty form a topology. Same for cocountable.
    1. Empty is present by definition, whole is cofinite and cocountable. (The finite (countable) subset absent from it is $\varnothing$
    2. Binary intersection of co- is a co- of binary union; binary union of finites is finite, binary union of countables is countable.
    3. Union of co is co of intersection. Intersections of finites and countables are respectively finite and countable.

## Bases
1. Bases are v. weird. Exercise: show that they define a topology.
1. ...this is a definition of topology via _neighbourhoods,_ isn't it? (No, but it might be adjacent.)
1. Okay, so the definition says three things: 
    1. every element must be in some basis set
        1. Aka: basis covers the whole space
    2. every intersection of two basis sets is covered by the union of all basis sets it contains
    3. and open sets are these that have a covering* by basis sets
        1. Well, not covering; covering by basis sets contained in it.
        2. ...this says exactly that open sets are made by unions of basis sets, right?
2. Checking that it's a topology is three things: 
    1. that empty and full are open
        1. Full is open by the first axiom of basis
        2. Empty is open because it has a trivial (empty) covering.
    1. that all unions are open
        1. first, basis sets are trivially open w/ themselves as covers
        2. second, any open set is made by unioning these
        3. third, union of two such open sets is again a union of basis sets; done.
    2. that finite intersections are open
        1. build two open sets as some two unions of basis sets, intersect these two.
        2. We get a union of componentwise binary intersections.
        3. every such intersection is again covered by some basis set it contains and therefore is open
        4. therefore binary intersections are unions of opens and are open by the point below. Done.
5. Okay, cool.

### Examples of bases
1. Open disks in R² 
    1. The first is obvious, the second not quite so much, but: we only need to check binary intersections! So we draw a binary intersection of two disks, we pick a point in it, we cover it by a sufficiently small disk, we're done.
    2. (btw, couldn't do that w/ boundary points of closed disks.)
2. open rectangles in R²
    1. Even easier: intersection of two is either empty or an open rectangle itself.
2. Exercise: show that these two bases generate the same topology
    1. ...what?!
    1. Okay, so the way to do this is to strict-cover arbitrary rectangle w/ circles, and arbitrary circle w/ rectangles
    1. I think we can just pick arbitrary point not on the boundary and cover it with a tiny rectangle or a circle
2. Exercise: can I basisify discrete topology?
    1. Yes! Singletons are necessary (only they can strict-cover themselves), and are sufficient.
3. What about cofinite or cocountable topologies?
    1. No! From cofinite we can remove all cofinite sets up to a finite depth n and recover them from unions of n+1 depth, but if we remove all then there's nothing left.

### Bases lemmata
1. Lemma that topology is given by unioning its basis: I mean, yes.
2. Reverse lemma: if we can strict-cover topology X with a subtopology C then obv. C is a basis.
3. Q: suppose two topologies have bases, and one is finer. What about their bases?
    1. A: well, if a topology has two bases, they must strictcover each other, right. Because either strictcovers any open set and the other is a collection of open sets. 
    2. In the same vein, a finer base strictcovers the coarser topology and so should strictcover  its basis.
    3. Moreover, if the coarseness is strict then the other doesn't.
    4. Conversely, if one basis strictcovers another, then must generate at least all unions of the latter, so it must generate a nonstrictly finer topology.

### Three topologies on R, by bases:
1. Standard, with basis being open intervals
2. Lower limit, with lower-inclusive semiintervals
3. K, with open intervals and also open intervals minus $\{1/n \mid n \in \Z_+\}$
4. Ex: they're bases.
    1. Cover: all yes. Intersect: yes (empty or basis), yes (ditto), ...yes?
5. Ex: second and third are strictly finer than second, and are incomparable.
    1. I see that open intervals do not strictcover the left boundary.
    2. I don't see why the third is not strictcoverable. 
        1. Oh. Zero. Zero is not excluded, and will not be coverable because holes on the right are dense.
        1. Slightly more lucidly: if we take e.g. (-1; 1) w/ inverses excluded, then holes are dense on the right side of 0, but 0 itself is included, and no open interval can strictcover it.
1. Incomparability goes by the same arguments: a of [a; b) is obviously not strictcoverable; 0 of (-1; 1)\{1/n} is also not: if $b \le 0$ then 0 is not covered, if b > 0 and $a \le 0$ then [a; b) covers all holes between 0 and b, so.

## Other things
1. Subbases: cool.
1. Idle thought: 
    1. Open rectangles are exactly products of open intervals, aren't they! Cool. 
    2. And open n-cubes as a basis are homeomorphic to open n-balls as a basis,
    3. so all standard R^n topologies (induced by the standard metric) are de facto product topologies of n copies of standard topology on R.

## Exercises
1. Any set strictcovered elementwise by open sets is open. This is kinda trivial.
2. Nine topologies on {a b c}: 
    1. trivial, generated by {b}, generated by {ab}, {b}, {bc}
    2. {ab}, {a} + {bc}, {ab} + {b} + {c}
    3. {a} + {ab}, {a} + {b}, discrete.
    4. The goal is to order them.
    5. There are three main paths from discrete to trivial: hugging the left wall, hugging the right wall, and diagonal.
    6. Additionally, {a} + {b} is finer than {b} and {ab} + {b} + {bc} is finer than {ab}.
    7. Every other present arrow is made by transitivity.
8. Show that {U | X – U is countable or empty} is a topology.
    1. empty and full: present
    2. intersection: if we remove from X two countable sets, we remove their union which is also countable.
    3. union: we effectively remove from X intersection of countables which is countable.
    4. Next: that {U | X – U is infinite, empty, or X} is not.
    5. union breaks: intersection of infinites can be nonempty and finite.
6. Three-pronged.
    1. Arbitrary intersection of topologies is a topology
        1. empty and full are in all, and so are in the intersection,
        2. if A & B are in all, then $A \cap B$ is in all, and so is in the intersection,
        3. if $A_\alpha$ are in all, then $\bigcup_\alpha A_\alpha$ is in all, and so is in the intersection. Done.
        2. Union isn't: if A & B are in _some_ topologies, no guarantee their intersection or union is in any of them.
    3. Topologies on X form a complete lattice, aka have arbitrary meets and joins, aka there's a unique minimal topology containing the union and a unique maximal topology contained in the intersection.
        1. Intersection itself is the meet: it's already a topology.
        2. The topology formed from a subbasis of the union is the join. kinda by definition.
    3. Computation of a meet and a join for a specific pair of topologies on {abc}: {a} + {ab} and {a} + {bc}.
        1. Their meet is just {a}
        2. Their join is generated by {a} + {ab} + {bc} as a subbasis, which results into a basis of {a} + {b} + {bc}.
3. If A ais a basis (or a subbasis) of T, then T is the intersection of all Ts containing A.
    1. T contains this intersection because T is one of topologies being intersected over.
    2. T is contained in the intersection because every set in T _must_ be present in a topology containing A.
    3. Done.
4. Incomarability of $\R_K$ and lower limit topology: done above
5. Five topologies on $\R$:
    1. Standard, R_K, finite complement, upper limit, (-∞, a).
    2. The goal is to order them.
    3. The order is: upper limit is finer than R_K is finer than std is finer than finite complement and (-∞, a), and last two are incomparable.
    4. Proof of first: any point but 0 we can strictcover by a sufficiently tiny interval; 0 we can cover by virtue of 0 being included in the (a, 0].
    5. Proof of second is given somewhere above.
    6. Easy to see how to strictcover finite complement and (-∞, a) by open intervals.
    7. Finite complement can't strictcover (-∞, a) because latter has infinite amount of points absent.
    8. (-∞, a) can't strictcover holes.
    9. Done.
10. Basis of open intervals with rational boundaries generates standard topology on R.
    1. How: rationals are dense in R, and so we can in fact strictcover any point in an open interval by a rational open interval
    2. And: semiopens with rational boundaries do not generate the limit lower topology
    3. Because: can't strictcover real left boundary.
4. And done! Cool.